---
title: 'ND Interviews: Anna Kushner'
date: 2010-06-22 20:07:00 -0400
featured: false
description: This May we continued our in house interviews with The Halfway House
  translator Anna Kushner.
related_contributors:
- author/anna-kushner.md
related_books: ''
gallery: ''
featured_image_position: center
draft: true

---
_Kushner's “commanding translation captures the unlikely combination of insouciance and resignation that defines Rosales’s tone.” (Words Without Borders). Anna tells the story of discovering the book in Spanish, and the following journey of securing the rights to the book in order to translate it. Her insight into Rosales and his work provides an original perspective on the novel that truly enhances the meaning and significance of the work.
_

**By Owen Roberts**

ND: How did you first learn of Guillermo Rosales and his work?

AK: I read Boarding Home back in college. It was a tattered borrowed copy that I didn’t keep, unfortunately, that someone had lent me. My life moved on, yet many years later, a good friend of mine in Paris and I were talking about what [books] were coming out in France and what was coming out in the United States, because she reads in English and I read in French, so we would always share things. One day she said “I just read this amazing novel that just came out in French, but I’m sure that you’ve read it because it’s by a Cuban writer.” When she first said the name of it, she gave me the title in French, which is Mon Ange, and it didn’t ring any bells at all.

I said, “I don’t think I know that book.” She started describing what it was about and I said, “Wait a second, can you look inside the cover and see what the original title was, is it Boarding Home?” She said, “It has to be called Boarding Home, because it’s all about this boarding home,” so they had retained the name of the house he was in, in the French version, that type of institution. At that point I thought, “Oh my god, I don’t have that book anymore, but I’d love to read it.” I happened to be in grad school at the time, so I was able to order it through the University’s inter-library loan.

I was just as wowed that time reading it as I had been almost ten years before.

I thought, “I can’t believe this doesn’t exist in English,” I started doing some research, and I found that in fact it was not available in English. At that point, I wasn’t thinking that I would translate it necessarily, it was just one of these good deed for literature type of things, where I thought, “Someone will translate it at some point. I’m just going to figure out if that needs to be done or not.”

Then as time wore on I became more invested in the process because I became so obsessed with the idea that it had to come out in English. At one point I contacted Ediciones Universal in Miami, who had originally published the book, and they told me they didn’t have the rights anymore. Then I found out that a Spanish publishing house [Siruela] was bringing the book out, in a new edition with a different title, [La Casa de los Naufragos]. Then I was at the Madrid book fair. I went to the tent and talked to someone there who was really enthusiastic about the book, and thought it was doing well, and of course it would be great to talk to someone who’s interested in bringing it out in English. She gave me a card for some editor whose name I don’t remember now, and said she would send an email to this person and tell them to talk to me and see what we can do. I left Madrid being really excited and thinking, “Wow this is really going somewhere.” Then I came home and sent emails and never received any response again and I tried leaving phone messages and never received any response. I even tried contacting Actes Sud, the French publisher, to see if they could give me any leads on who had the rights and what could be done to try to bring this book out in English, and then it all just kind of went by the wayside. I resigned myself to the fact that it was just going to be a more difficult enterprise and I didn’t have the energy to pursue it.

Then a total coincidence occurred. I had been working very closely with a Cuban author named Norberto Fuentes, who wrote The Autobiography of Fidel Castro, starting in about 2004 when I first read La autobiografia in Spanish and really loved it, and he was looking for someone to help him translate pieces of it to try to sell to an American publishing house. We’d been in touch, and in early 2007 I had just come back from Cuba and I visited him in Miami on my way through. We were just talking about everything and anything, and I had just been in Cuba, and so we were talking largely about his recollections of his time in Cuba. We started talking about writers, and people he was friends with, and he mentioned some illustrious writers like Reinaldo Arenas. We talked more about that whole creative process and his friendships with other writers and how the regime influenced their writing, and how they went in different directions. Then he mentioned his friend Guillermito, who met a very sad end.

He basically narrated his friend Guillermito’s life story from the time he arrived in Miami until the time he killed himself in the early 90s. I knew exactly who he was talking about, and it took everything to not shout, “Oh my god this is the craziest coincidence in the entire world, you’re talking about Guillermo Rosales!” I think maybe I did say something like that. And he just looked at me and said, “You know Guillermito? You know his work?” I said, “Yeah, Boarding Home is one of the most amazing books ever, I’ve been wanting to translate it, but I can’t figure out how to get the rights or where to even start. He said, “Oh, well, I know his sister. She’s here in Miami. Do you want me to introduce you?”

My mind was just racing. Of course, I said yes. But it wasn’t just as easy as him picking up the phone right then and there and taking me to her house. I was wishing that would happen at that moment. He said, “Let me work on this, because I haven’t talked to her in several years. But I can get her contact information through mutual friends, and I’ll get it to you.” Eventually he did, and he left her a message saying, “We haven’t talked in so long, I hope you’re well. I want you to know that my translator is also very interested in translating Guillermo’s work. If you don’t mind I’ve given her your number and she’ll be in touch with you.” So that began the process of really getting it somewhere, after several years.

The first time that I started trying to contact Ediciones Universal and Siruela was all back in 2002, 2003. Here we are in 2007, five years or so later. Then things all came together. At the same time I was trying to get in touch with Leyma, I found out that Barbara Epler, at New Directions, was interested in the book. We started talking, and Barbara was asking, “How likely do you think it is that you’re going to be able to talk to Guillermo Rosales’ sister? Should we both try to contact her together?” So while we were strategizing about this, I finally heard back from his sister. She was very grateful for my interest in the book, but wasn’t necessarily ready to sign over all the rights. I understand now from knowing her better that she had a lot of hesitation about the whole process. The book originally came out in 1987, and was largely forgotten about by local media and even local readers in Miami. And then suddenly it was a huge success in France in 2002. That was a little bit difficult for her to deal with in terms of it bringing up a lot of the family history, and people in the family who had disowned Guillermo.

She didn’t feel very comfortable right away, the idea of it coming out in English, and bringing up all those feelings again. So it was very lucky that everything happened through someone that I knew and she knew––Leyma had known Norberto [Fuentes] from Cuba as well. I was coming recommended to her by someone who she had some confidence in. And Barbara at New Directions was interested in the book at the same time, so I was also able to have an official connection. I wasn’t just a renegade translator who was promising to get it published somehow, without really having a game plan. So Barbara and I set up a meeting with Guillermo’s sister when we were at the Miami book fair in the fall of 2007.

It was great, we just hit it off as soon we all saw each other. We had dinner and talked a little bit about the book itself, and how amazing the book is, and how we’d really like to bring it to an English speaking audience. But we also spoke a lot about Guillermo himself, and about Leyma’s experiences and recollections of him. I feel like that evening, for her, I’m just guessing, but I feel like she felt free to talk about him in a way that she didn’t get to in her daily life. I could just feel the warmth of the memories and the feeling of freedom of being able to chat about someone with people who aren’t going to judge or interject their own memories, or their own theories on this person’s life or anything. We were just happy to hear whatever she had to say and to learn more about the writer of this incredible book that both Barbara and I were so taken by.

After that meeting, Leyma agreed to publish the book with New Directions, with me as the translator. From there, that was in November of 2007, and the book came out in May of 2009, so I basically started translating it in the late spring of 2008. And here we are.

ND: That’s an amazing story. Could you talk about the process of translating and how you approached translating his style?

AK: Guillermo Rosales’ writing is very straight forward. It’s deceptive in that way, because, you think, “Oh he comes straight to the point, and he doesn’t dance around the subject with his sentences, so that should be easy enough to translate into English.” But it was actually a little bit more difficult than some other works I’ve done from Romance languages––even some writers whose sentences are typically longer, or more lyrical. That kind of writing allows the translator a little more creativity. It also helps if you’re working with a living author, who allows you to be a little bit more creative and playful with the text. You can try something and run it by the author and see how he or she feels and see if that works.

With Guillermo Rosales, first of all, I couldn’t have an ongoing conversation with him. I could have conversation with people who knew him, but no one who actually sat down and wrote the text I was working with. So I had that challenge, because there is a certain level, as a translator, when you’re rendering something into English, where it’s difficult to get the same exact sentence. Languages have different ways of expressing the same idea. And there were words in Spanish that are very common and ordinary words, but if you were to use that same word in English, from the dictionary, would sound very pretentious, or give a different sense of the entire sentence, or of the character who is speaking that word. So sometimes you have to choose something that is a little bit more pedestrian or vulgar, to match the same tone.

Guillermo’s work didn’t allow for those types of interpretations. He’s so sparse with the type of descriptions he uses. He really lets a lot of the action in the book speak for itself, and speak to the reader, so that was a challenge. And the nick names for some of the people were challenges as well, I thought about that for a very very long time. The most challenging thing was that he has characters who navigate between the worlds of English and Spanish, because it’s in Miami. So he has certain things that are in poor English, on purpose, because it’s a Spanish speaking character who says it in Spanglish, or some mix. Then he has English speaking characters, who say something in English because his English is not perfect. So there were moments when I would think, “To be faithful to the text, I should leave this, but there’s no way that someone born and raised in the United States would ever say this this way, it’s just not English.” There were other parts where I did leave some words in Spanish and some words in English to give that provisional sense of a sentence being said in both, because it’s not a book that takes place entirely in one language, in the original.

I had to get opinions from other people, because sometimes you’re so close to a text that you think something works, but you need to show it to someone else and say, “Read this and tell me how it sounds to you.” Or you read it out loud, or you find yourself having this moment when you’re talking out loud in your apartment when no one else is around. That’s the part where I start going mad myself.

So that was the verbal part, I mean the things having to do with words, and then there’s the whole issue of what happened in the book, which is a hard book to read through once, in some ways, because of how dark some of the characters and their actions are. And it’s an even harder book to have to read through so many times. I probably read it three or four times before I even started translating it, between the first time I read it, and then rediscovered it, and when I was trying to find the rights to it. It’s a book that I absolutely love, but it is hard to sit through some of the scenes that he writes, because the really graphic way some of the abuse is portrayed. Translating that was challenging. I’m going back and reading through the same scene again and again as I try to get into the space to translate this, and to make sure that it comes across as strongly in English as it did in Spanish. I don’t have a particular technique, I just try to get into that space.

I’ve spent a lot of time, fortunately or unfortunately, reading difficult descriptions of things because of the type of work I’ve done––I did human rights work for a really long time. I’ve read a lot of really detailed descriptions of the kinds of abuse people are subject to, either in preparation for their going to court––sending documents and wanting someone else to look at them and make sure they render this experience in a way that would make a judge rule in their favor––or in preparation for writing press releases, or whatever. So I have read a lot of these things. But it doesn’t make it easier. I guess I’ve just found a space to be able to look at it and, not necessarily remove myself from it. If anything I feel even more impacted by it, having read so much, and having it recall other experiences.

In fact, part of Guillermo’s book––and what I think is powerful about it––is the fact that he is using this very personal experience of this one man inside a halfway house, but, at the same time, knowing what I know about his biography, of someone who grew up in Cuba, as an artist, under the Castro regime, encountered many problems with the Castro regime as a result of being a writer, as a result of writing things that weren’t necessarily approved or that were criticized for being too graphic. I understand that he also lived this world on a global level, in a halfway house of a whole country. Though, unfortunately, I never got to talk to Guillermo about this, I do see the halfway house as a reflection of the political reality he lived as well, and the types of abuses that happen in Cuba and with other regimes.

So that, in a way, made it just more tolerable for me to read through these descriptions, to know that it wasn’t just one instance. I was also thinking he was making a statement on this level of abuse that happens to everybody in other places, everyday. So, I can’t take a break from translating this right now and go have a glass of wine, or whatever I’d rather be doing to get this image out of my head. I need to make sure that it comes across just as strongly and that it impacts someone else besides me. So that was the approach I took.

ND: Has your previous work in human rights influenced the type of books that you’ve been interested in translating?

AK: I’m not sure. That’s kind of a chicken before the egg question: Did I go into human rights because these types of really complex relationships in the world interest me? I don’t know. I just know that the kinds of books I’ve translated in addition to The Halfway House—I translated Gonzalo Tavares’ Jerusalem, also a very dark book, large parts of which take place inside an institution, and which shows the kind of really horrendous things that people in an institution are subject to. I’ve spent a large part of my professional career doing human rights, looking at the kinds of abuses people are subject to within prisons, within their countries for speaking their minds. I read a lot of human rights reports detailing the kinds of abuses people are subject to, the kinds of torture prisoners were subject to at Abu Ghraib, for example.

I don’t know what it is about this. Part of me sees the literary representations of this as something that I hope will spark some sense of consciousness in the average person. One who doesn’t necessarily look at these kinds of reports, or the things that are put out by institutions that do human rights work. But part of me thinks that there’s this dark side of humanity that is important to be aware of, and makes for very rich literature.

I really was taken with Boarding Home, the original title of The Halfway House. Something about that book really moved me. I don’t really know how to boil it down. Was it a specific passage or character, or was it the interaction between all of them? Was it the fact that he evokes this Miami that I remember so clearly from when I was a kid and would go to there to visit relatives? I didn’t grow up in Miami, but I spent a lot of time there in my childhood summers. And I had an elderly aunt that was in one of these types of homes. It was a small one story house, and I don’t even know if I paid attention to the other residents. I just remember she was there. She was probably about ninety years old at the time, and I was maybe ten or eleven. I remember visiting her there, and that contrast between this really depressing interior life––interior in the sense of being both inside the house and inside herself––and then from her world in this halfway house type of environment, to go outside where there’s sunshine, where people are selling pasteles and flowers and whatever else––all this vibrancy. So I kind of saw that again in the book when he has those opportunities to leave the halfway house, and he feels the sense of hope that he can escape from it. It was so palpable to me, remembering those visits to my aunt, that contrast between the halfway house and the street outside, and how you can be invigorated when you’re suddenly outside again. So it just spoke to me.

ND: You seem to have developed a relationship with Guillermo Rosales through his work, despite having never met him. Could you talk about that?

AK: It’s a really complex relationship because he can’t speak back, except through his work. Unfortunately, there’s so little of his work that remains––he destroyed most of what he wrote before he died. There’s part of me that wishes I could have talked to him before he did something that drastic. That also makes it more difficult even to have an ongoing conversation in my head. I can only piece together what I’ve heard from his sister, from Norberto Fuentes, from accounts I’ve read, and from what he’s actually left preserved, which is this book, The Halfway House, and two other books: a book of short stories and a novella.

But I have some sense of what I think he’s like. I think he was a very private person in some ways, and I think the whole question of whether The Halfway House is autobiographical or not is probably a question that would make him very uncomfortable. I feel like he would shun that type of inquiry, and try to focus on some other aspect of the book. He might point out how some character represents this or that, and not whether he is William Figueras. But from what I know of him I know there are definitely certain facets of William Figueras’ life that do parallel Guillermo Rosales’ life, in terms of arriving in Miami, being put in a halfway house by his relatives, being extremely well read.

I would love to know what he would tell me to read next. I would ask him something like that. Everyone I’ve talked to who knew him personally talked about how well read he was. Not just in terms of having books on his shelf and spouting off names––as he does at one point in the halfway house when he says he’s read Proust––but sharing that literature and knowledge. He would want to bring those writers to other people that he knew––just loving people through literature, in a way. I remember one of the anecdotes his sister told me when we first met was about him giving her books when she was younger. Some of these books she was too young to read, but these were the books he loved at the time, and he thought she should be reading them. That idea is so beautiful to me. I try to picture him that way when I have any kind of mental image of him and his interactions. If he were to be sitting here, I would be so touched, if in appreciation for translating his book, and if he liked the English I rendered it into…I don’t know…but if he were to say to me, “These are the books I’ve picked out for you to read next,” that would be so amazing to me. It’s something I feel really cheated about, that he can’t do that.

ND: Can you tell me anything about the novel Rosales wrote in Cuba, El Juego de la Viola, or his collection of short stories?

AK: They’re both as incredible as The Halfway House. The novella is a story about some young boys in Cuba. It feels very typical of a specific time and place in the world, to me, so I’ll be curious to see how it resonates with an American audience, particularly a younger American audience who didn’t live in that era. The main character is obsessed with comics, which is a huge part of his fantasy world. He lives in a world where his relationship with his family is pretty big, and his interior world to escape from that is a big character in the novel, and the kids in the neighborhood and the things they do to keep themselves occupied on hot, Cuban afternoons. I’m really interested to see how American readers will take to this book. For me, it felt like I was eavesdropping on my father’s recollections of his childhood or something like that—my father is Cuban, and he grew up in Havana. Or, like I was reading a snippet of something by Guillermo Cabrera Infante. It feels very very Cuban, in a way that The Halfway House doesn’t. The Halfway House, to me, feels a little more universal than this novella, which is tentatively titled Leap Frog in English. So, we’ll see how it comes across, but I think it’s a fantastic piece of work. And his short stories, I’m especially excited about, because they’ve never been published in Spanish. This is a manuscript that his sister had, and that had been rumored about, and some of the stories had been published in literary magazines in US, maybe in the 80s and 90s, but not the entire collection. It will be very exciting to see it all come out together.

ND: Where do you think Rosales fits into the whole of Cuban literature? Given that he only has these few works.

AK: I think he’s as influenced by being Cuban, and the experience of being Cuban at a very particular time, post revolution. But I think he also used elements that are universal in literature. I don’t see The Halfway House as being particularly Cuban. Obviously it’s informed by his experience, and, as I said earlier, you definitely can see it as a statement on the entire experience of being in this totalitarian regime. But I think if you played with some of the characters and situation in that novel and maybe set it in West Berlin in the 80s and had some comments on the life back in East Berlin, that it might still work. It doesn’t feel like you’d have to change that many elements of it. So, for that reason, I have a hard time with questions like, “Where does this fit into Cuban literature?”

ND: How do you feel about the critical reception of The Halfway House since it’s release?

AK: The critical reception has been really good. It feels like a lot of it has been focused on how autobiographical this book is, which, again, I feel like Rosales would feel very uncomfortable with, and would just want the book to stand on its own. There’s the downside that he’s not around to focus the attention otherwise, but there’s the fact that there’s not that much detail about his life, so people aren’t digging up all kinds of things and, whereas, if he were still alive, it may be easier for people to knock on his door, and ask the neighbors about him and whatever else.

But the critical reception has been very good, so far. I’m always really pleased when I meet people who hear my name and say, “Did you translate The Halfway House?” because I never expected that that would happen with a book that is so literary, and would only appeal to a certain sector of the reading population. So it’s always nice when I meet someone who, unprompted, tells me that they love The Halfway House. I’m pleased with the critical reception of it, but I’m not sure it quite reaches the French level. My understanding was that, when this book came out in France, it was a runaway bestseller. I don’t know if that just has more to do with French readers, or if it’s been hyped up because we’re reading the news of this outside of France. But I would like to see it make some kind of New York Times Bestseller list. But the subject is a little too dark for it to make the New York Times Bestseller list. But it’s made a lot of other reading lists, by top critics. Barnes and Noble chose it is as a top translation for 2009. A lot of blogs have featured it, so that’s exciting.

ND: Thank you for talking with us.
